feat: rework IPAM documentation (#10135)
opsmill/infrahub: docs/docs/ipam/allocate-ips-and-prefixes.mdx

---
title: Allocate IPs and prefixes
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

> 

Reviewer: `Tabs` and `TabItem` are imported but never used on this page.

```suggestion

```

> ## Use a resource pool

Reviewer: **Content dropped — the when-to-use guidance.** The deleted `automate-with-resource-manager.mdx:22-31` carried the decision content: the four triggers (automated provisioning, generators, CI/CD, idempotent allocation) and the counterpart, "If you are only storing and querying IP data, IPAM alone is sufficient."

This page opens straight into mechanics, and `overview.mdx:58` keeps only a fragment. The hub-and-spokes rule is specific that a feature has to answer *when to use this*, not only *how*.

```suggestion
## When to allocate from a pool

Allocate from a Resource Pool when something other than a person assigns the address — a provisioning pipeline creating devices, a Generator rendering configuration, a CI/CD job reserving space for a new service. If you are only recording and querying IP data that already exists, the IPAM nodes alone are enough.

## Use a resource pool
```

For the full allocation walkthrough — creating the source prefix, creating the pool, and allocating directly or during node creation — see [Allocate IP addresses](../resource-manager/allocate-ip-address.mdx) and [Allocate IP prefixes](../resource-manager/allocate-ip-prefix.mdx).

## Allocate from generators

A Generator has the same Python SDK client available anywhere else, so allocating from a Resource Pool inside a Generator is a regular SDK call:

```python
device_loopback = await client.allocate_next_ip_address(
    resource_pool=loopback_pool,
    identifier=device_name,
    data={"interface": interface.id},
    branch=branch,
)

interconnect_subnet = await client.allocate_next_ip_prefix(
    resource_pool=interconnection_pool,
    kind=IpamIPPrefix,
    identifier=network.identifier,
    branch=branch,
)
```

> `allocate_next_ip_address` and `allocate_next_ip_prefix` take the same `resource_pool` and `identifier` arguments as the underlying `InfrahubIPAddressPoolGetResource` and `InfrahubIPPrefixPoolGetResource` mutations — passing a stable `identifier` (for example, the device name) keeps a Generator idempotent across reruns. See the infrastructure-edge topology model in `models/infrastructure_edge.py` for a worked example that allocates loopback and management addresses, and interconnection subnets, this way.

Reviewer: `models/infrastructure_edge.py` is a repo-internal path — readers on docs.infrahub.app don't have a checkout. The sample itself checks out against `models/infrastructure_edge.py:1457,1535-1537`, so it's a good example to have picked; it just needs a reachable link.

```suggestion
`allocate_next_ip_address` and `allocate_next_ip_prefix` take the same `resource_pool` and `identifier` arguments as the underlying `InfrahubIPAddressPoolGetResource` and `InfrahubIPPrefixPoolGetResource` mutations — passing a stable `identifier` (for example, the device name) keeps a Generator idempotent across reruns. The [infrastructure-edge topology model](https://github.com/opsmill/infrahub/blob/stable/models/infrastructure_edge.py) is a worked example that allocates loopback and management addresses, and interconnection subnets, this way.
```

## Advanced: next-available GraphQL primitives

> `InfrahubIPAddressGetNextAvailable` and `InfrahubIPPrefixGetNextAvailable` are read-only GraphQL queries that return the next free address or subnet from a given prefix. Unlike a Resource Pool allocation, they don't create a record, and they don't carry the pool's cross-branch allocation guarantee — two callers on different branches can compute the same "next available" value independently and collide.

Reviewer: "they don't **carry** the pool's cross-branch allocation guarantee" — `carry` meaning "have" is called out explicitly in the figurative-language rule. Same pattern at `build-your-ipam-schema.mdx:45` ("A value **carrying** prefix notation"), `:88` ("**carry** its own relationships"), `:41` ("it **lives on** the node"), and `query-ipam-data.mdx:8` ("**walk** the hierarchy tree").

```suggestion
`InfrahubIPAddressGetNextAvailable` and `InfrahubIPPrefixGetNextAvailable` are read-only GraphQL queries that return the next free address or subnet from a given prefix. Unlike a Resource Pool allocation, they don't create a record, and they don't provide the pool's cross-branch allocation guarantee — two callers on different branches can compute the same "next available" value independently and collide.
```

> Use Resource Pool for production workflows. Reach for these queries only to look up a value without persisting it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use Resource Pool for production workflows. Use these queries only to look up a value without persisting it.
```
